THE SMELL OF grass, and wet earth, and fog. The night movedthrough the clearing like a river. A few distant pinpricks of stars overhead, faint andfar and pale. Somewhere down the hill, the grass rustled as a mouse fled through it,but the People were not hunting tonight. Eyes gleamed in the night. Occasionally, a tail would thump the ground, once,twice, and then fall still. Very occasionally — an act of bravado — one of thePeople would slowly, ostentatiously, lick a paw. Then stop. You could smell the excitement in the wet air, the uneasiness, the fear. The wind brought the distant sound of a dog barking, and the ears of thePeople pricked forward instinctively, but, on this night of all nights, there wascertainly no time for dogs. Somewhere down below, in one of the human lairs at the foot of the hill, youcould hear a human[1] calling for one of the People in that shrill mixture of humantalk, strange wet noises, and oddly garbled and nonsensically out-of-context phrasesof the True Tongue that humans used to try summon the People who were lair-mateswith them, but none of the People were interested in Food tonight, even the fattest orthe hungriest of them, not even when the human made an enticing rattling noise with aFood. Opening-Stick against a Cold Round Thing of Food. After a while, the humanceased his plaintive calls, and there was silence again, except for the human soundsriding the night air: doors slamming, voices, the annoying clamoring and shrieking ofthe Noisy Dead Things with which the humans insisted on cluttering the lairs, thegrowling of the Fast Dead Things which the humans kept as slaves and actuallyencouraged to swallow them! (although they made the Things spit them up againlater) . . . but the People were used to those sounds, and ignored them. At last, when the sharp smells of excitement could get no stronger, when theireyes could grow no wider or wilder, and when their tails were beginning to lash withimpatience with a noise like a strong wind slashing through the branches of trees, thefull moon rose, immense and pale and round, its pockmarked face pitiless andremote and cold, and that creel orb was reflected full and bright in all the watchingeyes of all the People who waited below. One of the People stretched and yawned, showing all his teeth. His name wasCaeser[2], and he was known as a good hunter, and a fierce defender of his territory.In fact, he had a bloody feud of long duration and rich tradition going with Jefferson,whose territory adjoined his own, but Jefferson sat quietly beside him now, and didno more than turn a slightly disdainful glance at Caeser’s display of teeth. This was
no time for fighting, or mating, or for territoriality. The Hunter Light, the Death Light,The Night Face, That-Which-Lights-the-Way-to-Kill, was in the sky, and that hadalways meant the same thing, for uncounted generations back to the beginning of all. It was time to tell stories, under the cold, watchful gaze of The Night Face. “This I have seen,” Caeser began. “I was hunting with the tom named Bigfoot,and we came to the place where all the grass stops, and for almost as far as you cansee, until the trees start again far away, the ground is fiat and hard and smells ofDead Things. I warned Bigfoot that this was Ghostland, the territory of demons[3]and monsters, but his hunting blood was up, and the hunting is good under the treesat night, and he would not listen. And so we went out across the hard, bad-smellingstuff. Out into Ghostland.” Caeser looked away for a moment, out toward the far horizon, then turned hiseyes back to the People. “We walked out across Ghostland. The Dead Stuff wascold and hard under our paws, and we could hear our claws skritch on it. The windcarried the voices of ghosts as it whined past us. Suddenly, there was a bright light,far away, but coming closer. Closer! I froze with fear, but, in his eagerness, Bigfootwent on. There was a growling noise, louder and louder, like all the dogs that everwere born, growling at once. And then there was a light, blinding me. The light! Sobright, so close, as if The Night Face had fallen from the sky down on top of me!Then a Fast Dead Thing went by with a roar that shook the world and a blast ofwind that nearly knocked me over, and with a smell of burning. I heard Bigfootscream.” Caeser paused, and the rest of the People crept a step or two closer to hearhim. “When the Fast Dead Thing was gone,” he continued, “I went back, step byslow step, to see what had happened to Bigfoot.” Caeser paused again, significantly.“He was dead. The Fast Dead Thing had crashed him. His guts were everywhere,torn from his body, and his blood was all around. The middle of his body was flat,as though it had no bones in it anymore. He was mashed into the dead black groundof Ghostland, in a puddle of his own guts and blood. On his face was a look of fearand horror such as I hope never to see again.” The People shivered. After a moment, Caeser said, “Then I heard it comingback. The Fast Dead Thing. I saw its light. It was coming back from the way it hadgone. Coming back for me. I’m not ashamed to tell you all that I ran like a kitten!And ever since then, when I go near Ghostland, I can hear the Fast Dead Thinghunting for me, roaring back and forth, hunting through the night to find me.” There was an awed silence, and then a young queen named Katy said, “I hearthey can get you anywhere, the Fast Dead Things.” She looked around hernervously: “Even inside the lair: There are some of them who can follow you right in,and get you even when you’re inside. My mother told me that she used to get chasedby a little one that roared and whooshed and tried to pull her tail.” 
“That was just a Small Roaring Thing” a tom named Poorer said. “Thehumans play with them. They’re not really dangerous — though, of course, it’sbetter to stay away from them, just to be safe. But the Fast Dead Things, now —they can kill you even when they’re asleep!” “Nothing can kill you while it’s asleep,” Jefferson said. Pooter bristled, then licked his foot in a slow and insulting way that might havebeen provocation for a fight on another evening. “Yes? Well, I have seen this. Therewas one of the People, her name was Lady Jane, and she went near one of the FastDead Things at night, while it was sleeping. And she crawled inside the top of theThing, because the night was cold, and it was warm deep up inside the Thing. Andin the morning as I was watching a human came and made the Fast Dead Thingswallow it, and then the Thing woke up.” He shuddered. “It growled, and then itroared, and then Lady Jane screamed, and I smelled the hot smell of her blood. Thehuman got out, and made the Thing open up its smaller mouth in the front, and thenhe lifted Lady Jane out. And she was dead. Dead, and cut into pieces! Her head wascut nearly all the way off, hanging by some fur!” “Dead!” some of the People moaned. “Dead!” A scarred old fetal tom named Blackie, who had one ear tom nearly to rags,said, “You don’t need Dead Things to kill you, young ones!” He lashed his tail andmade the clicking and smacking noise that signified deep contempt among thePeople. “Humans will do the job readily enough! Yes, your precious humans, thethings you all live with, willingly! When I was a kitten, some humans put me in asack, and threw me in the river. Ai, the horror of it!” He shivered and shookhimself convulsively. “It was dark and hot and smothering, and I couldn’t breathe,and then I was falling, twisting and tumbling and falling, and there was no air tobreathe! My claws were sharp in those days, People, lucky for me, and I ripped myway out. But then I was in the water! In the water! I was under the water, with it allaround me — over my head! I had to swim, swim for my life, and I nearly diedbefore my head broke the surface and I could take a breath, and then I had to swimfor a long time before my feet found the ground again, and all the while the waterwas pulling at me, sucking at me, trying to pull me down to death!” A low growl went around the circle of the People. Their eyes gleamed. “My human goes in the water every day,” a young queen named Spooky said.“On purpose. She lets it go all over her! She doesn’t try to escape at all! Sometimesshe sits under the water, with only her head outside it!” The People moaned in horror. “At, they are strange creatures,” Jeffersonmuttered. “Strange!” 
“But those were Rogues, those humans who tried to kill you,” a young tomnamed Bangers said, somewhat uneasily, as though seeking reassurance. “We’ve allbeen chased and kicked by Rogues now and again, or had stones or Hard ClatteringThings thrown at us. That doesn’t mean that our humans would hurt us. My humanswouldn’t hurt me. They like me! They feed me and pat[5] me whenever I want themto!” “I had humans once, too, later on,” Blackie said bitterly. “They fed me andthey patted me — and then they cut my balls off!” Bangers hissed involuntarily, and many of the People blew their trails out toseveral times their normal size. “It could happen to you, too, young one!” Blackie said. “Don’t you think itcouldn’t! You think you’re safe with your humans because they feed you and giveyou a warm place to sleep, but you never know when they’re going to turn on youand torture[6] you. You’ll never know why they do it, either, but sooner or later,they will. They all will. None of them are any different!” “They wait until you’re sick,” a burly tom named Hobbes said. “They waituntil you’re feeling really bad, and then they take you to the Pain Place, to theTorture Place, and they hurt you more —” Another tom shuddered. “It’s true! The humans there stick things up yourass! And they stab you, with things that hurt! And they drain your blood out ofyou!” “They cut you!” a queen named Jasmine said, her voice thrilling with horror.“They cut you open! My humans took me there, to the Pain Place, with all its badsmells and its sick smells and the sounds of the People screaming in agony whiledogs sit around and watch them, and they left me there, locked in aBox-You-Can’t-Get-Out-Of, and I went to sleep, and when I woke up, my belly hadbeen slashed open! I could feel the cut, deeper than a cut from any fight. It hurt for along time, even when my humans came and got me and took me back to the lairagain. It hurt for a long time!” They were crouched close together now, almost touching their heads in acircle. “They kill People there, too,” Blackie said. “The humans kill them. And notjust the humans who live in-the Pain Place. Your precious humans. The very sameones who live with you and give you Food. They kill you, themselves!” There were a few wails of protest, and the People pressed closer together,shuddering. 
“I have seen it,” Blackie continued inexorably. “When they cut my balls off, inthe Pain Place, before they took me back to the lair and I ran away, they brought mylair-mate in, an old queen named Stuff who had lived with the humans before I joinedthem. Our humans brought her in, and they held her down while she fought to getaway, both of them held her down, and then another human stabbed her with a PainStick, and she struggled for a while, and then she died! I could smell that she wasdead! They’d killed her! Our humans! They held her down and killed her — andthey patted her while they were doing it!” Someone moaned with dread, and then fell silent. “And that’s what will happen to all of you! Every one of you! If a dog or aFast Dead Thing or some other kind of monster or demon doesn’t get you, then, atthe end, your own humans will kill you!” This was almost too much. They pressed close together for comfort, tooscared even to wail or moan now. There was a crazed light in Blackie’s eyes. “I saw Stuff’s ghost last night. Ioften see it, after dark. Her fur is like ice, like frost on a winter morning and her deadeyes give back no light . . .” The moon was high and full above them now, and it seemed to tug on theirsouls, as if it would suck them out through the tops of their heads and up into themysterious depths of the night sky, where they would fall forever through the dark. “Yes!” a tom shrieked. “Yes! I have seen it! Its feet leave no mark on thegrass when it walks, and its eyes are like deep pools of black water! And one night,when everyone slept except me, I could hear it outside, scratching on the door,trying to get in —” A huge Dead Thing went by overhead, roaring, a blazing light flying throughthe night sky like a terrible gazing eye, seeming to pass almost close enough totouch, and the People crouched low on the hillside until the monster had rumbledaway into distance and was gone. In the sudden shocked silence, Caeser said, almost with satisfaction, “TheGhostway is around us, always.” And the People shivered deliciously, and movedcloser in the night, and told their stories until the moon went down, as they have fora million generations, and as they will for a million more, until the Earth goes cold,and even the People are forgotten. 1.In the True Tongue, the word we render here as “human” is more closelyexpressed as “Bad-Smelling.Foodgiver-and-Lair-Mate-Who-Speaks-Loudly-and-Moves-Slowly,” althoughthat also is a loose translation, and subject to variation in local dialects. 
1.This was the name his humans had given him, of course. The True Names ofthe People are impossible to reproduce here, as the verbal element is only asmall part of each name, and perhaps the most insignificant part, the reallyvital information being conveyed by body posture, the speed and stiffness ofmovement, the position of the ears and tail, the pattern of ruffling or twitchingof the fur, and, most importantly, the hot rich smell of the anus, and thelingering, eloquent tang of urine. 1.The human word “demons,” of course, has associations with Christiantheology that the actual phrase in the True Tongue does not share, but it willserve to give an impression of something both malefic and enigmatic, anincomprehensible force that kills you with terrifying casualness, forunknowable reasons — if for any reason at all; this is more vivid in the speechof the People. 1.“False Skin “is about the closest you can come to this in the True Tongue,which doesn’t allow for much precision in distinguishing between one sort ofthing made of cloth or fabric and another; some dialects will allow reference toblankets as “False-Skins-That-You-Sleep-On. “All this is as nothingcompared to conveying some sense of what the human word “river” actuallytranslates to in the True Tongue — the literal “Moving Big Water” does littleto convey the sense of horror and supernatural dread with which the Peopleregard such bodies of water, as though they were an unholy and dreadfulanomaly in the natural order of the world. 1.Actually, “groom me,” in the True Tongue. The People consider humans to bebizarrely handicapped creatures since they must groom with their hands ratherthan with their tongues. They are widely pitied for this, although there isderisive speculation as to why this is so — in fact, in one dialect, the genericterm for “human “ translates to“Those-Who-Must-Groom-With-Their-Paws-Because-Their-Breath-Smells-So-Bad.” 1.In the True Tongue, the word for “torture” also implies a sort of willful,capricious, malevolent playfulness, and a highly refined aesthetic appreciationof the pain you are inflicting; if you’re ever seen one of the People with a birdor a mouse that they’ve caught, you get the idea. We’re pleased to have some short fiction from Gardner Dozois. His short stories aretoo few and far between. Although he has won two Nebulas for his fiction, he isperhaps better known for his award-winning editing skills. Every month he edits an
issue of Asimov’s Science Fiction Magazine, and each year he compiles The Year’sBest Science Fiction for St. Martin’s Press. His most recent work of book-lengthfiction is a short story collection, Geodesic Dreams: The Best Short Fiction ofGardner Dozois, published by Ace In “A Cat Horror Story,” Gardner takes on a difficult alien viewpoint—onethat exists close to home. 